hello and welcome to today's verified
live there's been International
condemnation after the death of seven
Aid workers in Gaza the charity World
Central Kitchen says their Convoy was
bombed in an Israeli air strike just
after they unloaded food from a
warehouse they are now suspending their
operations in Gaza the Israeli military
says it's conducting a review Into the
incident the seven workers are from
Australia Britain Poland are US Canadian
duel citizen as well as a Palestinian
world leaders and foreign ministers are
pressing Israel to clarify the
circumstances surrounding their deaths
our correspondent in Jerusalem yolan
Nell begins our coverage this
hour there were no survivors cars in the
aid Convoy were hit directly even with
the world's Central Kitchen logos
clearly displayed and the US charity
says prior coordination with the Israeli
military displaced gazin staying intense
nearby heard the blast and ran to try
and
help this is our situation anyone who
distributes Aid or brings it to Gaza is
exposed to shelling and death whether
it's an international organization or
not distressed colleagues of the seven
Aid workers killed have been absorbing
the shocking news since the War Began
the NGO has provided more than 40
million meals in Gaza Australian Lami
francom who appeared in a recent World
Central Kitchen video has been confirmed
as one of the Dead there are reportedly
British citizens too the Prime Minister
Rishi sunak says he's shocked and
saddened they're doing fantastic work
bringing alleviation to the suffering
that many are experiencing in Gaza they
should be praised and commended for what
they're doing they need to be allowed to
do that work unhindered and it's
incumbent on Israel to make sure that
they can do that and we're asking Israel
to investigate what happened urgently
because clearly there are questions that
need to be answered World Central
Kitchen has been sending food to Gaza
from Cyprus along a new sea route the
aid workers had just unloaded 100 tons
from the latest shipment when they came
under attack Israel's military says it's
investigating we are committed to
examining our operations thoroughly and
transparently I just spoke to wck
founder Chef Jose andos and expressed
the deepest condolences of of Israel
Defense Forces to the families and the
entire world Central Kitchen
family in Gaza where bodies of the aid
workers locals and foreigners are being
sent home for burial World Central
Kitchen says it's heartbroken and
grieving and these deaths will be felt
more widely too the Charities now paused
its operations in the war torn territory
where famine looming it says it will
soon make decisions about the future of
its work yolan now BBC News
[Music]
Jerusalem straight to breaking news an
update on that main story World Central
Kitchen have confirmed in the last few
minutes to the BBC that three of their
staff killed in that Israeli air strike
in Gaza were British we said in our
introduction that a variety of uh
foreign Nationals we knew there were uh
British workers but we did not know the
numbers and that coming in the last few
minutes that it is three of the seven
are British so that is just come from
World Central Kitchen confirming to the
BBC that three of the seven staff killed
were British so we will have more on
that element of that story in a moment
or two but in terms of the questions
being raised well we've heard world
leaders we've heard a variety of foreign
ministers asking serious questions of
Israel well Israel's primee Minister has
released this video message just a short
time ago let's hear Let unfortunately in
the last day there was a tragic incident
of an unintended strike of our forces on
innocent people in the Gaza Strip this
happens in war we are checking this
thoroughly we are in touch with the
governments and we will do everything
for this not to happen
again well that was Benjamin Netanyahu
let's talk to unicef's spokesperson
James Elder James welcome here to the
program a really tough day this your
reaction to this news of the deaths of
seven Aid
workers well it's just such a senseless
loss Matthew it's a reac an immense
tragedy for their families who would
have no doubt been worried for them
every single day uh that they're away
hearing news and happy to get the old
message back and no doubt happy to hear
the work that they were doing the
incredible work that they were doing the
th those people the Frontline some of
the Frontline actions for for for people
who were coming particularly down from
the north of Gaza Strip who had cut off
Matthew and had not seen food or or or
or sometimes anything like psychological
help and that's what these colleagues at
World kitchen were doing it was immense
work and they would have been sharing
that with families it's a senseless loss
just in the same way it underscores
there are senseless losses that families
are enduring on the Gaza Strip every
single day we heard there that you know
Inn lives beautiful innocent lives there
are beautiful innocent lives tens of
thousands of them have been killed since
this war started James we spoke to you
only last week on the program you were
there in Gaza you're now out but I
gather you met with this team only in
the last couple of days something like
this for all Aid workers must be
shocking must be
winding they're such an impressive team
Matthew they were where I met them um
one of their spaces at World Central
Kitchen which is just near the final
checkpoint on the coast there um they
have psychological support for people
because people who are coming out of the
north have suffered all types of
humiliation and Relentless bombardment a
lot of people in in residential housing
around Shea hospital f for two weeks had
seen unspeakable things and they come
out and they get food and and yeah so
there was something about these
colleagues Palestinian I hadn't met my
Australian counterpart um and they just
they they knew the dangers they wanted
to be there but I'm sorry when I say
they knew the dangers they knew this is
a difficult place to work it's a place
where you've got bad sanitation I just
left a friend who's got severe hepatitis
um because of what she's caught but you
don't expect this when you get approvals
to move and you're in an armored vehicle
you have to trust the occupying power
you have to trust Israel therefore that
you are allowed to move you're only
moving in that Convoy as we've all done
many times and an armored vehicle is
good if there's a stray bullet or
something a missile through the roof
with your exact
coordinates I mean and here and here we
are here we are James just for those
people watching around the world who
don't know how Aid agencies operate on
the ground the cars we're seeing images
of those vehicles on our screens at the
moment they were very clearly marked the
a agencies do let Israelis know what
they're planning their routs used the
car used is that absolutely common
practice
very much so it's essential you can't
move particularly where they are Derry
berer in the middle area in the north
you cannot move without that approval
you seek an approval might take a day it
might take three days but you seek an
approval two days before minimum you get
that approval the exact coordinance you
will move you will move to a designated
spot you might then wait it's called a
waiting era you might then wait again
for another call to go to get an all
clear then you will move again it is
laborious it is painstaking
it's an active military zone but then
once you start to move as these young
people were you know again in the in the
essential delivery of of food to people
facing famine then you do so in the hope
that despite all the horrors you've seen
that day at hospitals and so on and and
and injuries to Children you do so with
a fair knowledge that you will not get a
missile attack and yet here we are I
mean there are as I say there are
thousands of families who assume they'd
be safe in their homes a final thought
then because
World Central Kitchen have now suspended
their operations they had been at the
Forefront of that operation of bringing
in Aid via the sea that new route so
here is the question is this a
coincidence is it the fog of war or is
it something more
Sinister honestly Matthew I don't know I
can't speak to to the intent here of
course we've heard many many apologies
around this the the facts still remain
that we've certainly seen
um Mal intent in restrictions of Aid
that's why we have imminent famine
that's why we seen a catastrophic
decline that's why we see 13,000
children reportedly killed these numbers
don't don't occur when their all due all
due care is given to uh children
civilians or in this case those people
who traveled across the world to try and
help others James Elder thanks once
again thanks for joining us here live on